Add blog post: Fine tuning CLIP with Remote Sensing (Satellite) images and captions (#144)
huggingface/blog: fine-tune-clip-rsicd.md

---
title: Fine tuning CLIP with Remote Sensing (Satellite) images and captions
thumbnail: /blog/assets/25_clip-rsicd/clip_schematic.png
---

# Fine tuning CLIP with Remote Sensing (Satellite) images and captions

> _by Artashes Arutiunian (@arampacha), Dev Vidhani (@devvidhani), Goutham Venkatesh (@goutham794), Mayank Bhaskar (@cataluna84), Ritobrata Ghosh (@ghosh-r), and Sujit Pal (@sujitpal)_

Author: Done, awaiting gravatar thumbnails if applicable

> In July this year, [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/) organized a [Flax/JAX Community Week](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/master/examples/research_projects/jax-projects/README.md#quickstart-flax-and-jax), during which the community was invited to submit projects to train Hugging Face transformer models in the areas of Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV) on Tensor Processing Units (TPU) using [Flax](https://github.com/google/flax), a neural network library and ecosystem for [JAX](https://github.com/google/jax), a linear algebra library (like numpy) which can do automatic differentiation ([Autograd](https://github.com/hips/autograd)) and can compile down to [XLA](https://www.tensorflow.org/xla). [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com/) were co-sponsors of this event.

Reviewer: Small suggestion for using active voice instead of passive voice :)

```suggestion
In July this year, [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/) organized a [Flax/JAX Community Week](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/master/examples/research_projects/jax-projects/README.md#quickstart-flax-and-jax), and invited the community to submit projects to train Hugging Face transformer models in the areas of Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV) on Tensor Processing Units (TPU) using [Flax](https://github.com/google/flax), a neural network library and ecosystem for [JAX](https://github.com/google/jax), a linear algebra library (like numpy) which can do automatic differentiation ([Autograd](https://github.com/hips/autograd)) and can compile down to [XLA](https://www.tensorflow.org/xla). [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com/) were co-sponsors of this event.
```

Author: done

> In July this year, [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/) organized a [Flax/JAX Community Week](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/master/examples/research_projects/jax-projects/README.md#quickstart-flax-and-jax), during which the community was invited to submit projects to train Hugging Face transformer models in the areas of Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV) on Tensor Processing Units (TPU) using [Flax](https://github.com/google/flax), a neural network library and ecosystem for [JAX](https://github.com/google/jax), a linear algebra library (like numpy) which can do automatic differentiation ([Autograd](https://github.com/hips/autograd)) and can compile down to [XLA](https://www.tensorflow.org/xla). [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com/) were co-sponsors of this event.

Author: Accepted with changes to ensure continuity

> They organized 3 days of lectures during which speakers from Hugging Face and Google Cloud talked about TPUs, JAX, Flax, and how to use them to train Hugging Face transformer models (recordings for [day #1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fuAyUQcVzTY), [day #2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=__eG63ZP_5g), and [day #3](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZCMOPkcTu3s) available). This was followed by around 10 days of actual work, during which time Google Cloud provided each team with a GCP instance with a TPU. Each team was expected to train one or more Hugging Face models using JAX/Flax and share them with the community via their [model hub](https://huggingface.co/models). In addition, teams were asked to provide a demo [Hugging Face spaces](https://huggingface.co/spaces) showcasing the capabilities of their model. Approximately 100 teams participated in the event, and it resulted in 170 models and 36 demo spaces.

Author: Accepted with some minor changes.

Our team, like probably many others, is a distributed one, spanning 12 time zones. Our common thread is that we all belong to the [TWIML Slack Channel](https://twimlai.slack.com/), where we came together based on a shared interest in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) topics. 

> We decided that we would fine tune the [CLIP Network from OpenAI](https://openai.com/blog/clip/) with satellite images and captions from the [RSICD dataset](https://github.com/201528014227051/RSICD_optimal). The CLIP network learns visual concepts by being trained with image and caption pairs in a self-supervised manner, by using text paired with images found across the Internet. During inference, the model can predict the most relevant image given a text description, or the most relevant text description given an image. CLIP is powerful enough to be used in zero-shot manner on everyday images. However, we felt that satellite images were sufficiently different from everyday images, that it would be useful to fine-tune CLIP with them. Our intuition turned out to be correct, as the evaluation results (described below) shows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We fine-tuned the [CLIP Network from OpenAI](https://openai.com/blog/clip/) with satellite images and captions from the [RSICD dataset](https://github.com/201528014227051/RSICD_optimal). The CLIP network learns visual concepts by being trained with image and caption pairs in a self-supervised manner, by using text paired with images found across the Internet. During inference, the model can predict the most relevant image given a text description or the most relevant text description given an image. CLIP is powerful enough to be used in zero-shot manner on everyday images. However, we felt that satellite images were sufficiently different from everyday images that it would be useful to fine-tune CLIP with them. Our intuition turned out to be correct, as the evaluation results (described below) shows.
```

Author: accepted without change

> We think of our project more as an "applied" project, in the sense that it is more about providing a useful service than about significantly advancing the technological frontier. Our model can be used in applications to search through large collections of satellite images using text, or automatically find specific features in such images. Both these features can be invaluable for "digital assistant" type applications ranging from domains such as military / police surveillance to helping deal with natural disasters and climate change -- really any application where humans have to search through enormous quantities of image data. In a broader sense, it demonstrates that CLIP can be similarly fine-tuned for other domains also, such as Radiography or Pathology. You can read about our project on our [project page](https://github.com/arampacha/CLIP-rsicd), download our [trained model](https://huggingface.co/flax-community/clip-rsicd-v2) to use for inference on your own data, or see it in action on our [demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/sujitpal/clip-rsicd-demo).

Reviewer 2: Couple of comments bellow for this pagraph

```suggestion
The goal of our project was to provide a useful service and demonstrate how to use CLIP for practical use cases. Our model can be used in applications to search through large collections of satellite images using text or automatically find specific features in such images. Image and feature finding can be invaluable for applications where humans have to search through enormous quantities of image data such as helping to deal with natural disasters and climate change.  In a broader sense, it demonstrates that CLIP can be similarly fine-tuned for other domains also, such as Radiography or Pathology. 

You can read about our project on our [project page](https://github.com/arampacha/CLIP-rsicd), download our [trained model](https://huggingface.co/flax-community/clip-rsicd-v2) to use for inference on your own data, or see it in action on our [demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/sujitpal/clip-rsicd-demo).
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe it would be good to provide an example or describe a bit more what this means

```
or automatically find specific features in such images
```

Reviewer 2: `In a broader sense, it demonstrates that CLIP can be similarly fine-tuned for other domains also, such as Radiography or Pathology`

I think this is a great opportunity to mention and link to other projects from the event that used CLIP such as https://huggingface.co/spaces/flax-community/medclip-demo

Reviewer 2: I wonder if we should have a small section of potential misuses or ethical implications of the work

Reviewer: I also think it'd be good to highlight potential misuse, especially since it has massive implications with regard to military and police surveillance.

Author: incorporated all suggestions

> We think of our project more as an "applied" project, in the sense that it is more about providing a useful service than about significantly advancing the technological frontier. Our model can be used in applications to search through large collections of satellite images using text, or automatically find specific features in such images. Both these features can be invaluable for "digital assistant" type applications ranging from domains such as military / police surveillance to helping deal with natural disasters and climate change -- really any application where humans have to search through enormous quantities of image data. In a broader sense, it demonstrates that CLIP can be similarly fine-tuned for other domains also, such as Radiography or Pathology. You can read about our project on our [project page](https://github.com/arampacha/CLIP-rsicd), download our [trained model](https://huggingface.co/flax-community/clip-rsicd-v2) to use for inference on your own data, or see it in action on our [demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/sujitpal/clip-rsicd-demo).

Reviewer: This paragraph was a little hard to follow, so I just made some minor grammatical changes. Feel free to use this or @osanseviero's suggestion to break up the paragraph into two shorter ones :)

```suggestion
We think of our project more like an "applied" project because it is more about providing a useful service than significantly advancing the technological frontier. Our model can be used in applications to search through large collections of satellite images using text, or automatically find specific features in such images. These features can be invaluable for "digital assistant" type applications ranging from military/police surveillance to helping deal with natural disasters and climate change -- any application where humans have to search through enormous quantities of image data. In a broader sense, our project demonstrates that CLIP can also be similarly fine-tuned for other domains, such as Radiography or Pathology. You can read about our project on our [project page](https://github.com/arampacha/CLIP-rsicd), download our [trained model](https://huggingface.co/flax-community/clip-rsicd-v2) for inference on your data, or see it in action on our [demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/sujitpal/clip-rsicd-demo).
```

Author: Following @osanseviero 's feedback, we removed many unnecessary details from this paragraph and so resulting shortened version is no longer large and hard to read.

> Our project ended up placing third at the event, which was a very pleasant surprise. We are incredibly humbled and gratified that the judges saw the potential of our model. We are very grateful to the organizers for introducing us to Flax/JAX and for providing the resources to create and showcase our model. We are also very thankful to the other participants and organizers for sharing their knowledge and insights so freely, we have each benefited enormously from these interactions. 

Reviewer 2: I don't have strong opinion, but I think maybe we can skip this paragraph

Author: removing the paragraph

> In this post, we describe details of our training and evaluation process, and our plans for future work on this project.

Reviewer 2: At this point you're almost at 25% of the blog post. Maybe this intro could go closer to the beginning.

Author: Moved sentence up to earlier paragraph

## Training

### Dataset

> Our model was fine-tuned primarily using the RSICD dataset, which is a set of about 10,000 images collected from Google Earth, Baidu Map, MapABC and Tianditu, and provided freely to the research community for advancement of remote sensing captioning via [Exploring Models and Data for Remote Sensing Image Caption Generation](https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.07835) (Lu et al, 2017). The images are provided as (224, 224) RGB images at various resolutions. Each image has up to 5 captions associated with it.

Reviewer 2: It would be great if you add a link to the RSICD dataset here

Author: Done, didn't link this previously because it was already linked.

> Our model was fine-tuned primarily using the RSICD dataset, which is a set of about 10,000 images collected from Google Earth, Baidu Map, MapABC and Tianditu, and provided freely to the research community for advancement of remote sensing captioning via [Exploring Models and Data for Remote Sensing Image Caption Generation](https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.07835) (Lu et al, 2017). The images are provided as (224, 224) RGB images at various resolutions. Each image has up to 5 captions associated with it.

Reviewer: I think this would be easier to follow if it was broken up into several shorter sentences.

```suggestion
We fine-tuned our model primarily with the RSICD dataset. This dataset consists of about 10,000 images collected from Google Earth, Baidu Map, MapABC, and Tianditu. It is provided freely to the research community to advance remote sensing captioning via Exploring Models and Data for Remote Sensing Image Caption Generation (Lu et al, 2017). The images are (224, 224) RGB images at various resolutions, and each image has up to 5 captions associated with it.
```

Author: accepted without change, put back links from previous version suggested by @osanseviero

> 

Reviewer 2: I think this is a nice opportunity to put some images of the dataset

Author: done, also added a "header" image for the post from the demo

> In addition, we used the [UCM Dataset](https://mega.nz/folder/wCpSzSoS#RXzIlrv--TDt3ENZdKN8JA) and the [Sydney dataset](https://mega.nz/folder/pG4yTYYA#4c4buNFLibryZnlujsrwEQ) for training, The UCM dataset is based on the UC Merced Land Use dataset. It consists of 2100 images belonging to 21 classes (100 images per class). The dataset provides 5 captions for each image. The Sydney dataset contains images of Sydney, Australia from Google Earth. It contains 613 images belonging to 7 classes. Images are (500, 500) RGB, and provides 5 captions for each image.

Reviewer 2: It would be great to understand a bit more why you chose to use those additional datasets

> In addition, we used the [UCM Dataset](https://mega.nz/folder/wCpSzSoS#RXzIlrv--TDt3ENZdKN8JA) and the [Sydney dataset](https://mega.nz/folder/pG4yTYYA#4c4buNFLibryZnlujsrwEQ) for training, The UCM dataset is based on the UC Merced Land Use dataset. It consists of 2100 images belonging to 21 classes (100 images per class). The dataset provides 5 captions for each image. The Sydney dataset contains images of Sydney, Australia from Google Earth. It contains 613 images belonging to 7 classes. Images are (500, 500) RGB, and provides 5 captions for each image.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition, we used the [UCM Dataset]((https://mega.nz/folder/wCpSzSoS#RXzIlrv--TDt3ENZdKN8JA)) and the [Sydney dataset](https://mega.nz/folder/pG4yTYYA#4c4buNFLibryZnlujsrwEQ) for training. The UCM dataset is based on the UC Merced Land Use dataset. It consists of 2100 images belonging to 21 classes (100 images per class), and each image has 5 captions. The Sydney dataset contains images of Sydney, Australia, from Google Earth. It contains 613 images belonging to 7 classes. Images are (500, 500) RGB and provide 5 captions for each image.
```

Author: accepted without change

### Model

> Our model is just the fine tuned version of the original CLIP model shown below. Inputs to the model are a batch of captions and a batch of images passed through a text encoder and image encoder respectively. The training process uses contrastive learning to push closer images and their respective captions and to push apart images and captions for other images. In this way, images and captions that belong together get pushed closer together.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our model is just the fine-tuned version of the original CLIP model shown below. Inputs to the model are a batch of captions and a batch of images passed through a text encoder and image encoder respectively. The training process uses contrastive learning to push closer images and their respective captions and to push apart images and captions for other images. In this way, images and captions that belong together get pushed closer together.
```

Reviewer 2: I would not assume readers know what contrastive learning is. Maybe 1-2 sentences or a link to an external resource would go a long way here.

Author: linked contrastive learning and made explanation more clear

> Our model is just the fine tuned version of the original CLIP model shown below. Inputs to the model are a batch of captions and a batch of images passed through a text encoder and image encoder respectively. The training process uses contrastive learning to push closer images and their respective captions and to push apart images and captions for other images. In this way, images and captions that belong together get pushed closer together.

Reviewer: This paragraph was also a little hard to follow. When you say **closer images**, it's not clear if you are pushing images that are closer together, or if you are just pushing the images closer.

```suggestion
Our model is just the fine-tuned version of the original CLIP model shown below. Inputs to the model are a batch of captions and images passed through a text encoder and image encoder respectively. The training process uses contrastive learning to push similar images and their respective captions together. Dissimilar images and captions get pushed apart.
```

Author: I have reworded it to link contrastive learning and to provide little more background. Is this understandable or should I reword further?

<img src="/blog/assets/25_clip_rsicd/clip_schematic.png"/>
<center><i>CLIP Training and Inference (Image Credit: CLIP: Connecting Text and Images (https://openai.com/blog/clip/))</i></center>

### Data Augmentation

> Because our dataset was not very large, we used both image augmentation and text augmentation in an effort to regularize our dataset and prevent overfitting.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In order to regularize our dataset and prevent overfitting due to the size of the dataset, we used image and text augmentation.
```

Author: accepted without change

> Image augmentation was done inline using built-in transforms from Pytorch's Torchvision package. The transformations used were Random Cropping, Random Resizing and Cropping, Color Jitter, and Random Horizontal and Vertical flipping.

Reviewer 2: Maybe worth linking to torchvision

Author: linked

> Text augmentation was done, using backtranslation, to generate captions for images that had less than 5 unique captions per image. We used the [Marian MT family of models from Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/transformers/model_doc/marian.html) to translate the existing captions into French, Spanish, Italian and Portugese and back to English to fill out the captions for these images.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Text augmentation was done using backtranslation to generate captions for images that had less than 5 unique captions per image. We used the [Marian MT family of models from Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/transformers/model_doc/marian.html) to translate the existing captions into French, Spanish, Italian and Portugese and back to English to fill out the captions for these images.
```

Author: accepted without change

> Text augmentation was done, using backtranslation, to generate captions for images that had less than 5 unique captions per image. We used the [Marian MT family of models from Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/transformers/model_doc/marian.html) to translate the existing captions into French, Spanish, Italian and Portugese and back to English to fill out the captions for these images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We augmented the text with backtranslation to generate captions for images with less than 5 unique captions per image. The [Marian MT]((https://huggingface.co/transformers/model_doc/marian.html)) family of models from Hugging Face was used to translate the existing captions into French, Spanish, Italian, and Portuguese and back to English to fill out the captions for these images.
```

Author: accepted without change

As shown in these loss plots below, image augmentation reduced overfitting significantly, and text and image augmentation reduced overfitting even further.

<img src="/blog/assets/25_clip_rsicd/image-augment-loss.png"/>
<img src="/blog/assets/25_clip_rsicd/image-text-aug-loss.png"/>
<center><i>Evaluation and Training loss plots comparing (top) no augmentation vs image augmentation, and (bottom) image augmentation vs text+image augmentation</i></center>

## Evaluation

### Metrics

> For the evaluation, we used a subset of the RSICD test set where image file names contained the category the image belonged to. We found 30 categories of images in this subset. Evaluation was done by comparing each image with a set of 30 caption sentences of the form `"An aerial photograph of {category}"`. The model produced a ranked list of the 30 captions, from most relevant to least relevant. Categories corresponding to captions with the top k scores (for k=1, 3, 5, and 10) were compared with the "label" category as indicated in the image name. The scores are averaged over the entire set of images used for evaluation and reported for various values of k, as shown below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A subset of the RSICD test set was used for evaluation by . We found 30 categories of images in this subset. The evaluation was done by comparing each image with a set of 30 caption sentences of the form `"An aerial photograph of {category}"`. The model produced a ranked list of the 30 captions, from most relevant to least relevant. Categories corresponding to captions with the top k scores (for k=1, 3, 5, and 10) were compared with the "label" category. The scores are averaged over the entire set of images used for evaluation and reported for various values of k, as shown below.
```

Author: accepted without change (except fix grammatical error)

> The `baseline` model represents the pre-trained `openai/clip-vit-base-path32` CLIP model. This model was fine tuned with captions and images from the RSICD dataset, which resulted in a significant performance boost, as shown below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `baseline` model represents the pre-trained `openai/clip-vit-base-path32` CLIP model. This model was fine-tuned with captions and images from the RSICD dataset, which resulted in a significant performance boost, as shown below.
```

Author: accepted without change

> Our best model was trained with image and text augmentation, with batch size 1024 (128 spread across 8 TPU devices), and the Adam optimizer with learning rate 5e-6. Our second base model was trained with the same hyperparameters, except that we used the Adafactor optimizer with learning rate 1e-4. You can download either model from their model cards linked to in the table below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our best model was trained with image and text augmentation, with batch size 1024 (128 spread across 8 TPU devices), and the Adam optimizer with learning rate 5e-6. We trained our second base model with the same hyperparameters, except that we used the Adafactor optimizer with learning rate 1e-4. You can download either model from their model cards linked to in the table below.
```

Author: accepted without change

| Model-name                               | k=1   | k=3   | k=5   | k=10  |
| ---------------------------------------- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| baseline                                 | 0.572 | 0.745 | 0.837 | 0.939 |
| bs128x8-lr1e-4-augs/ckpt-2               | 0.819 | 0.950 | 0.974 | 0.994 |
| bs128x8-lr1e-4-imgaugs/ckpt-2            | 0.812 | 0.942 | 0.970 | 0.991 |
| [bs128x8-lr1e-4-imgaugs-textaugs/ckpt-4](https://huggingface.co/flax-community/clip-rsicd)<sup>2</sup>   | 0.843 | 0.958 | 0.977 | 0.993 |
| bs128x8-lr5e-5-imgaugs-textaugs/ckpt-8   | 0.831 | 0.959 | 0.977 | 0.994 |
| bs128x8-lr5e-5-imgaugs/ckpt-4            | 0.746 | 0.906 | 0.956 | 0.989 |
| bs128x8-lr5e-5-imgaugs-textaugs-2/ckpt-4 | 0.811 | 0.945 | 0.972 | 0.993 |
| bs128x8-lr5e-5-imgaugs-textaugs-3/ckpt-5 | 0.823 | 0.946 | 0.971 | 0.992 |
| bs128x8-lr5e-5-wd02/ckpt-4               | 0.820 | 0.946 | 0.965 | 0.990 |
| [bs128x8-lr5e-6-adam/ckpt-1](https://huggingface.co/flax-community/clip-rsicd-v2)<sup>1</sup> | **0.883** | **0.968** | **0.982** | **0.998** |

_1 - our best model, 2 - our second best model_

### Demo

> You can access our [CLIP-RSICD Demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/sujitpal/clip-rsicd-demo) here. It uses our fine-tuned CLIP model to provide the following functionality. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can access our [CLIP-RSICD Demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/sujitpal/clip-rsicd-demo) here. It uses our fine-tuned CLIP model to provide the following functionality:
```

Author: accepted without change

* Text to Image search
* Image to Image search
* Find text feature in image

> For the first two features, the "image corpus" is composed of images from the RSICD test set. They are encoded using our best fine-tuned CLIP model and stored in a NMSLib index which allows Approximate Nearest Neighbor based retrieval. For text-to-image and image-to-image search respectively, the query text or image are encoded with our model and matched against the image vectors in the corpus. For the third service, we partition the incoming image into patches and encode them, then encode the text feature being looked for, and match the text vector with each of the image patch vectors, and return the probability of finding the feature in each patch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first two functionalities uses the "image corpus" from the RSICD test set. They are encoded using our best fine-tuned CLIP model and stored in a NMSLib index which allows Approximate Nearest Neighbor based retrieval. For text-to-image and image-to-image search respectively, the query text or image are encoded with our model and matched against the image vectors in the corpus. For the third functionality, we partition the incoming image into patches and encode them, encode the queried text feature, match the text vector with each image patch vector, and return the probability of finding the feature in each patch.
```

Author: accepted without change except NMSLib linked

## Future Work

We are grateful that we have been given an opportunity to further refine our model. Some ideas we have for future work are as follows:

1. Construct a sequence to sequence model using a CLIP encoder and a GPT-3 decoder and train it to caption images.

> 2. Fine tune the model on more image caption pairs from other datasets and investigate if we can improve its performance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Fine-tune the model on more image caption pairs from other datasets and investigate if we can improve its performance.
```

Author: accepted without change

3. Investigate how fine-tuning affects the performance of model on non-RSICD image caption pairs.

> 4. Investigate the capability of the fine-tuned model to classify outside the categories it has been fine tuned on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Investigate the capability of the fine-tuned model to classify outside the categories it has been fine-tuned on.
```

Author: accepted without change

  </a>
  <a href="/sujitpal">
    <div class="bfc">
      <code>sujitpal</code>
      <span class=fullname">Sujit Pal</span>
    </div>
  </a>
</div>

## Fine tuning CLIP with Remote Sensing (Satellite) images and captions

<img src="/blog/assets/clip-rsicd-header-image.png"/>

In July this year, [Hugging Face](https://huggingface.co/) organized a [Flax/JAX Community Week](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/master/examples/research_projects/jax-projects/README.md), and invited the community to submit projects to train Hugging Face [transformers](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers) models in the areas of Natural Language Processing (NLP) and Computer Vision (CV).

Participants used Tensor Processing Units (TPUs) with [Flax](https://github.com/google/flax) and [JAX](https://github.com/google/jax). JAX is a linear algebra library (like `numpy`) that can do automatic differentiation ([Autograd](https://github.com/hips/autograd)) and compile down to [XLA](https://www.tensorflow.org/xla), and Flax is a neural network library and ecosystem for JAX. TPU compute time was provided free by [Google Cloud](https://cloud.google.com/), who co-sponsored the event.

> Over the next two weeks, teams participated in lectures from Hugging Face and Google, trained one or more models using JAX/Flax, shared them with the community, and provided a a demo with [Hugging Face spaces](https://huggingface.co/spaces) showcasing the capabilities of their model.  Approximately 100 teams participated in the event, and it resulted in 170 models and 36 demos.

Author: accepted without change

The goal of our project was to provide a useful service and demonstrate how to use CLIP for practical use cases. Our model can be used by applications to search through large collections of satellite images using textual queries. Such queries could describe the image in totality (for example, beach, mountain, airport, baseball field, etc) or search or mention specific geographic or man-made features within these images. CLIP can similarly be fine-tuned for other domains as well, as shown by the [medclip-demo team](https://huggingface.co/spaces/flax-community/medclip-demo) for medical images.

> The ability to search through large collections of images using text queries is an immensely powerful feature, and can be used as much for social good as for malign purposes. Possible applications include national defense and anti-terrorism activities, and the ability to spot and address effects of climate change before they become unmanageable, etc. Unfortunately, this power can also be misused, such as for military and police surveillance by authoritarian nation-states, so it does raise some ethical questions as well.

Author: 👍

The goal of our project was to provide a useful service and demonstrate how to use CLIP for practical use cases. Our model can be used by applications to search through large collections of satellite images using textual queries. Such queries could describe the image in totality (for example, beach, mountain, airport, baseball field, etc) or search or mention specific geographic or man-made features within these images. CLIP can similarly be fine-tuned for other domains as well, as shown by the [medclip-demo team](https://huggingface.co/spaces/flax-community/medclip-demo) for medical images.

The ability to search through large collections of images using text queries is an immensely powerful feature, and can be used as much for social good as for malign purposes. Possible applications include national defense and anti-terrorism activities, the ability to spot and address effects of climate change before they become unmanageable, etc. Unfortunately, this power can also be misused, such as for military and police surveillance by authoritarian nation-states, so it does raise some ethical questions as well.

> You can read about our project on our [project page](https://github.com/arampacha/CLIP-rsicd), download our [trained model](https://huggingface.co/flax-community/clip-rsicd-v2) to use for inference on your own data, or see it in action on our [demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/sujitpal/clip-rsicd-demo).

Reviewer 3: (nit)
```suggestion
You can read about the project on our [project page](https://github.com/arampacha/CLIP-rsicd), download the [trained model](https://huggingface.co/flax-community/clip-rsicd-v2) to use for inference on your own data, or see it in action on our [demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/sujitpal/clip-rsicd-demo).
```

### Training

#### Dataset

> We fine-tuned our model primarily with the [RSICD dataset](https://github.com/201528014227051/RSICD_optimal). This dataset consists of about 10,000 images collected from Google Earth, Baidu Map, MapABC, and Tianditu. It is provided freely to the research community to advance remote sensing captioning via [Exploring Models and Data for Remote Sensing Image Caption Generation](https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.0783) (Lu et al, 2017). The images are (224, 224) RGB images at various resolutions, and each image has up to 5 captions associated with it.

Reviewer 3: > The images are (224, 224) RGB images at various resolutions

This sounds a bit confusing, the resolution is specified here (224, 224) but then it also says  various resolutions

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We fine-tuned the CLIP model primarily with the [RSICD dataset](https://github.com/201528014227051/RSICD_optimal). This dataset consists of about 10,000 images collected from Google Earth, Baidu Map, MapABC, and Tianditu. It is provided freely to the research community to advance remote sensing captioning via [Exploring Models and Data for Remote Sensing Image Caption Generation](https://arxiv.org/abs/1712.0783) (Lu et al, 2017). The images are (224, 224) RGB images at various resolutions, and each image has up to 5 captions associated with it.
```

<img src="/blog/assets/25_clip_rsicd/image-augment-loss.png"/>
<img src="/blog/assets/25_clip_rsicd/image-text-aug-loss.png"/>
<center><i>Evaluation and Training loss plots comparing (top) no augmentation vs image augmentation, and (bottom) image augmentation vs text+image augmentation</i></center>

### Evaluation

#### Metrics

A subset of the RSICD test set was used for evaluation. We found 30 categories of images in this subset. The evaluation was done by comparing each image with a set of 30 caption sentences of the form `"An aerial photograph of {category}"`. The model produced a ranked list of the 30 captions, from most relevant to least relevant. Categories corresponding to captions with the top k scores (for k=1, 3, 5, and 10) were compared with the category provided via the image file name. The scores are averaged over the entire set of images used for evaluation and reported for various values of k, as shown below.

The `baseline` model represents the pre-trained `openai/clip-vit-base-path32` CLIP model. This model was fine-tuned with captions and images from the RSICD dataset, which resulted in a significant performance boost, as shown below.

> Our best model was trained with image and text augmentation, with batch size 1024 (128 spread across 8 TPU devices), and the Adam optimizer with learning rate 5e-6. We trained our second base model with the same hyperparameters, except that we used the Adafactor optimizer with learning rate 1e-4. You can download either model from their model cards linked to in the table below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Our best model was trained with image and text augmentation, with batch size 1024 (128 on each of the 8 TPU cores), and the Adam optimizer with learning rate 5e-6. We trained our second base model with the same hyperparameters, except that we used the Adafactor optimizer with learning rate 1e-4. You can download either model from their model repos linked to in the table below.
```

Author: applied w/o modifications

| Model-name                               | k=1   | k=3   | k=5   | k=10  |
| ---------------------------------------- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| baseline                                 | 0.572 | 0.745 | 0.837 | 0.939 |
| bs128x8-lr1e-4-augs/ckpt-2               | 0.819 | 0.950 | 0.974 | 0.994 |
| bs128x8-lr1e-4-imgaugs/ckpt-2            | 0.812 | 0.942 | 0.970 | 0.991 |
| [bs128x8-lr1e-4-imgaugs-textaugs/ckpt-4](https://huggingface.co/flax-community/clip-rsicd)<sup>2</sup>   | 0.843 | 0.958 | 0.977 | 0.993 |
| bs128x8-lr5e-5-imgaugs-textaugs/ckpt-8   | 0.831 | 0.959 | 0.977 | 0.994 |
| bs128x8-lr5e-5-imgaugs/ckpt-4            | 0.746 | 0.906 | 0.956 | 0.989 |
| bs128x8-lr5e-5-imgaugs-textaugs-2/ckpt-4 | 0.811 | 0.945 | 0.972 | 0.993 |
| bs128x8-lr5e-5-imgaugs-textaugs-3/ckpt-5 | 0.823 | 0.946 | 0.971 | 0.992 |
| bs128x8-lr5e-5-wd02/ckpt-4               | 0.820 | 0.946 | 0.965 | 0.990 |
| [bs128x8-lr5e-6-adam/ckpt-1](https://huggingface.co/flax-community/clip-rsicd-v2)<sup>1</sup> | **0.883** | **0.968** | **0.982** | **0.998** |

_1 - our best model, 2 - our second best model_

#### Demo

> You can access our [CLIP-RSICD Demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/sujitpal/clip-rsicd-demo) here. It uses our fine-tuned CLIP model to provide the following functionality:

Reviewer 3: (nit)
```suggestion
You can access the [CLIP-RSICD Demo](https://huggingface.co/spaces/sujitpal/clip-rsicd-demo) here. It uses our fine-tuned CLIP model to provide the following functionality:
```

* Text to Image search
* Image to Image search
* Find text feature in image

> The first two functionalities uses the RSICD test set as it's image corpus. They are encoded using our best fine-tuned CLIP model and stored in a [NMSLib](https://github.com/nmslib/nmslib) index which allows Approximate Nearest Neighbor based retrieval. For text-to-image and image-to-image search respectively, the query text or image are encoded with our model and matched against the image vectors in the corpus. For the third functionality, we partition the incoming image into patches and encode them, encode the queried text feature, match the text vector with each image patch vector, and return the probability of finding the feature in each patch.

Reviewer 3: (nit)
```suggestion
The first two functionalities use the RSICD test set as its image corpus. They are encoded using our best fine-tuned CLIP model and stored in a [NMSLib](https://github.com/nmslib/nmslib) index which allows Approximate Nearest Neighbor based retrieval. For text-to-image and image-to-image search respectively, the query text or image are encoded with our model and matched against the image vectors in the corpus. For the third functionality, we divide the incoming image into patches and encode them, encode the queried text feature, match the text vector with each image patch vector, and return the probability of finding the feature in each patch.
```
